                    Fourmilab Earth and Moon

                              User Guide

Fourmilab's Earth and Moon combines high-resolution NASA imagery
of the Earth (with ice, snow, and vegetation based upon the
middle of each month) with calculation of the position of the
Sun as observed from Earth to show the illuminated portion of a
cloudless Earth.

The Moon is shown in its current relative position to the Earth,
with a day and night mask showing the illuminated and dark
portions of the Moon.  The Moon is usually shown much closer to
the Earth than its actual distance in order to fit in typical
display spaces, but if you have a large property (say, 128
metres on a side), you can configure the Moon's distance to be
at the correct scale.  The Moon's near face is oriented with
respect to the Earth accounting for optical librations due to
the eccentricity and inclination of the Moon's orbit.  Imagery
of the Moon is derived from NASA high-resolution images from the
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft.

Floating Text Legends
--------------------------

Floating text legends are displayed above the Earth and Moon
(you can turn them off if you find them distracting) which show
the following information:

    Earth
        Date and time (UTC)
        Julian Day and fraction
        Sub-solar point (latitude and longitude
            where the Sun is overhead)
        Sub-lunar point (latitude and longitude
            where the Moon is overhead)

    Moon
        Phase (percentage illuminated)
        Age (days, hours, and minutes since New Moon)
        Distance (Earth-Moon distance in km, Earth radii)
        Angle subtended (apparent diameter of the Moon in degrees)
        Date and time of Moon phases in this lunation

Chat Commands
-------------------

You can control Earth and Moon by commands sent to channel /2173
on local chat.  (You can change the channel number if you
wish.)  All commands ignore whether letters are upper or lower
case.  Available commands are:

    Animate
        Animate updates to the model, stepping through time at
        the current Animation Rate (default 1/10 second) and
        advancing time by the Animation Step (default 1/100 day)
        on each step.  This allows demonstrating how the Moon
        moves relative to the Earth, how its phases change, and
        how the seasons progress on the Earth.

    Freeze
        Halt periodic updates, either based upon real time or
        during an animation.  This allows stopping updates for
        closer examination when you see something interesting.

    Help
        Give this notecard to the requester.

    Real
        Stop an animation and return to displaying real time
        positions of the Earth and Moon.

    Reset
        Reset the scripts in the simulation and restore all
        default values.  Note that this will lose any settings
        you have made since you rezzed the object or performed
        the last reset.

    Set
        Set a variety of parameters, described below.

        Set Access public/group/owner
            Set who is allowed to send commands.  By default,
            only the owner is permitted.  You can permit members
            of the owner's group or the general public to send
            commands if you wish and trust their good
            intentions.

        Set Animation Rate t
            Set how rapidly updates occur when running an
            animation to time t in seconds (decimal values
            permitted).

        Set Animation Step [n] [unit]
            Set the time step for each animation update.  The
            step is set to n units, where n is a number (decimal
            fractions permitted) and unit is one of: minute,
            hour, day, week, month, or lunation (synodic month,
            time between new Moons).  If n is omitted, 1 is
            assumed; if unit is omitted, day is used.

        Set Base on/off
            Show or hide the wooden base beneath the Earth
            globe.

        Set Cardinal on/off
            If set to on, the texture maps for the Earth and
            Moon and night/day masks are replaced with maps on
            which the cardinal points (north and south poles and
            points on the equator every 90 degrees starting at
            the prime meridian) are indicated by coloured discs,
            and the equator and meridians by coloured lines.
            This is primarily intended for developers testing
            rotation logic.  Turning cardinal mode off restores
            the standard textures, selecting the sharp
            terminator.

        Set Channel n
            Set the local chat channel upon which commands are
            accepted to n (greater or equal to 2).  By default,
            commands are accepted on channel 2173.

        Set Date yyyy-mm-dd HH:MM:SS
        Set Date jjjjjjj.fffff
            Stop real time updates and display the Earth and
            Moon as of the specified date, either as date and
            (optional) time in Universal Time (UTC) or as a
            Julian day number and fraction.  You can, if you
            wish, after setting date and time, start an
            animation from that time with the Animate command.
            To return to real time display, use the Real
            command.

        Set Fixed [Earth/Sun]
            Controls whether the Earth globe is held in a fixed
            position in global space, with the terminator moving
            around it, or whether the day and night mask points
            at the Sun and the Earth rotates under it.  This is
            a matter of personal preference.  Showing the Earth
            rotating is more faithful to what you'd see from a
            viewpoint in space, but people who want to position
            the globe in, say, a corner, showing their own
            location on Earth to viewers, may prefer the fixed
            Earth display and moving terminator.

        Set Inclination [Earth/Sun]
            When you "Set Fixed Sun", the Sun stays at a fixed
            longitude with respect to the Earth.  If you set
            Inclination to Earth (the default), the Sun will
            also be fixed in latitude and the Earth will tilt
            back and forth to account for its inclination and
            progress around its orbit.  Selecting Sun fixes the
            Earth so the polar axis is vertical and the Sun will
            appear of move north and south due to the Earth's
            inclination.  Choose whichever you find more
            intuitive and interesting.

        Set Legend [Earth/Moon/Both] on/off
            Show or hide the floating text legends above the
            Earth and Moon.  If you omit which you wish to
            control, both are affected.

        Set Moon on/off
            Shows or hides the Moon.

        Set Moondist r/real
            Set the distance at which the Moon is displayed from
            the Earth globe in units of radii of the Earth globe
            size to r.  This is the distance when the Moon's
            current distance is equal to the semi-major axis of
            its orbit.  The distance shown will be scaled
            according to the Moon's instantaneous distance.  If
            you specify "real", the Moon will appear at a
            distance to scale with the size of the Earth and
            Moon globes.  The Moon is a long way from the Earth!
            If you use the default globe sizes, you'll need a
            large property (on the order of 128×128 metres,
            assuming the Earth globe is at the centre) so that
            the Moon doesn't disappear over the property line.
            The default Moondist setting is 2.

        Set Night [Earth/Moon/Both] on/off
            Show or hide the night side masks for the Earth and
            Moon.  If you omit which you wish to control, both
            are affected.

        Set Terminator soft/sharp
            The terminator is the division between day and night
            on the Earth and Moon globes.  By default, the
            terminator is shown as a sharp line.  If you specify
            "soft", a blurred division will be shown.
            Unfortunately, the rendering engine in most Second
            Life viewers handles the soft terminator in an
            infelicitous manner, and you'll probably be happier
            with the appearance of the sharp terminator.

    Spin
        Slowly rotate the Earth and Moon to show them off from
        different viewpoints.  This rotation is purely cosmetic;
        it does not affect the calculated position of the Earth
        and Moon.  It is handy when you wish to display the
        model in a corner where people can't walk easily around
        it to see it from different perspectives.  Of course you
        can sit on the Earth or Moon while they're spinning!

    Status
        Display internal status information, including script
        memory usage, mostly of interest to developers.  The
        positional astronomy values shown are calculated based
        upon the last calculation to update the model, whether
        real time or set with the "Set Date" command.

    Step
        Stop automatic updates and advance the simulation one
        animation step.  This stops an in-progress animation.
        You can restart the animation with the Animate command.

    Stop
        Stop the spinning.  You can resume the spinning with the
        Spin command.

Dialogue Commands
-------------------------

Touching the Earth or Moon globe pops up a dialogue which
provides direct access to commonly used commands. The dialogue
may be restricted to owner, group, or available to everybody,
via the "Set Access" chat command.

    Help
        Give this notecard to the requester.

    Animate / Real time
        Toggle animation or real time display.

    Step
        Stop animation, advance one animation step.

    Spin / Stop spin
        Toggle spin or stop spinning.

    Legend Earth
        Toggle Earth floating text legend on and off.

    Legend Moon
        Toggle Moon floating text legend on and off.

The dialogue commands are purely a convenient way to enter
frequently-used commands which can also be sent via local chat.

About Accuracy
-------------------

Positional astronomy, such as calculating the positions of the
Earth, Moon, and Sun for any date over a long period of time, is
extremely demanding on the precision of calculation of computer
systems.  Such calculations are usually done using "double
precision" arithmetic, which maintains around 15 decimal places
of accuracy.  Second Life floating point arithmetic uses "single
precision", which experiences truncation and loss of precision
between 8 and 9 decimal places.  While this is sufficient to
make things "look right" in most three-dimensional models, it is
completely inadequate for the calculations required to display
the Earth and Moon accurately over long periods of time.

Fourmilab Earth and Moon uses carefully-tailored algorithms
which have been adapted to make the most of Second Life's
limited precision.  The result is that things almost always
"look right", but if you look closely at details, such as the
times of lunar phases or the the precise positions of the Sun
and Moon with respect to the Earth, they may be off by as much
as a few minutes from values computed with double precision
computation.  The only way to obtain such accuracy in Second
Life would be to implement a general multiple-precision
arithmetic library in the Second Life scripting language, and
this would immediately blow up the size of the code and run into
the memory limits for Second Life scripts.  Earth and Moon
attempts to balance these constraints to provide results which
look correct in all circumstances, while computing values which
are, for most observers, sufficiently accurate for all practical
purposes.

Permissions and the Development Kit
---------------------------------------------

Fourmilab Earth and Moon is delivered with "full permissions".
Every part of the object, including the scripts, may be copied,
modified, and transferred without any restrictions whatsoever.
If you find a bug and fix it, or add a feature, let me know so I
can include it for others to use.  The distribution includes a
"Development Kit" directory, which includes all of the textures
used in the models and diagnostic textures employed in
development which may be useful in debugging new features.

The Development Kit directory contains a Logs subdirectory which
includes the development narrative for the project.  If you
wonder, "Why does it work that way?" the answer may be there.

Fourmilab Earth and Moon is built entirely from Second Life
prims with applied textures.  There are no opaque mesh objects
which you cannot modify in-world.

The Earth and Moon object consists of five prims linked in a
specific order.  If you unlink a prim to edit it and relink it
in a different order, everything will break.  Be sure to
preserve the link indices given at the top of the "Fourmilab
Earth and Moon" script if you make such modifications.  The
wooden base (whether visible or not) is the root prim of the
linked set.

Data Sources
----------------

Earth imagery is based upon the NASA Blue Marble Next
Generation:
    https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/BlueMarble
Visible Earth data sets:
    https://visibleearth.nasa.gov/collection/1484/blue-marble
in particular, the twelve monthly "Blue Marble Next Generation
w/ Topography and Bathymetry" images which may be accessed from
that page.  The full resolution PNG images, which are delivered
in tiles to avoid size restrictions in image processing
programs, were heavily processed to create the monthly textures
used here.

Moon imagery is based upon the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter
Camera (LROC) Wide Angle Camera (WAC) 100 metre Global
Morphology Mosaic, v3:
    https://astrogeology.usgs.gov/search/map/Moon/LRO/LROC_WAC/Lunar_LRO_LROC-WAC_Mosaic_global_100m_June2013
with the original image:
    https://planetarymaps.usgs.gov/mosaic/Lunar_LRO_LROC-WAC_Mosaic_global_100m_June2013.tif
This is a 5.5 gigabyte image!  It was extensively processed to
produce the texture used here.

All of these data sources are in the public domain.

License
---------

This product (software, documents, images, and models) is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.
    http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/
    https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode
You are free to copy and redistribute this material in any
medium or format, and to remix, transform, and build upon the
material for any purpose, including commercially.  You must give
credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes
were made.  If you remix, transform, or build upon this
material, you must distribute your contributions under the same
license as the original.
